# Bakasp

Web service generator for ASP-based constraint solving.

usage:
- write the ASP backend
- get your users to provide their preferences
- watch the valid models.



## Example

Let's imagine a web service to assign one of four characters to each of four players of a tabletop RPG.

Input base encoding:

    1{ play(H, P): charc(P), ok(H,P) } 1 :- human(H).
    1{ play(H, P): human(H), ok(H,P) } 1 :- charc(P).

Note that `ok/2` atoms are expected for the program to behave normally, as well as `charc/1` and `human/1`. They will all be derived from the configuration and user's input.

Here is a minimal working configuration, using that base encoding and providing informations on input data and website behavior:


    {
        "base encoding": "1{ play(H, P): charc(P), ok(H,P) } 1 :- human(H). 1{ play(H, P): human(H), ok(H,P) } 1 :- charc(P).",
        "shows": "play/2",

        "users options": {
            "type": "restricted",
            "allowed": ["Pierre", "David", "Noémie", "Noa"]
        },
        "choices options": {
            "type": "multiple",
            "choices": ["Méléas", "Éléa", "Haringer", "Ina"],
            "data atoms": [
                "human({user})",
                "charc({choice})"
            ],
            "produced atoms": "ok({user},{choice})"
        }
    }

By running `python poc.py that-config.json`, you will be serving an autogenerated website, allowing specific users to provide their choices, and to see the stable models.
In that particular instance, each of the four user will be able to tell which character(s) she is wanting to play, so each model will describe a combination of human/character that fullfill everyone's wishes.
If any exists.


## Pages
The following pages constitute the web service interface, automatically generated from your configuration.

### /
The index contains a description, and link to other pages.

### /user
Allow for user to select its name.

### /user/<userid>
Allow for user to indicate its choice(s).

### /compilation
If configuration said so, it's the access to that page that provoke the compilation of models.

### /results
The representation of given models.

### /history
The list of changes and their influence on models.

### /overview
The current choices of all users.

### /configuration
Access to the full json configuration, if allowed by the said configuration.

### /configuration/raw
Access to the input json configuration, if allowed by the said configuration.


## More examples
See the [examples/](examples/) directory, containing, among others:

- a [team maker](examples/make-teams.json) config, where users indicate who they want in their team, and N teams of equal number of players are formed, trying to content a maximum of peoples.
- a [score-balanced team maker](examples/make-score-balanced-teams.json) config, typically useful in laser tag, when you need, knowing the score of each participant, to equilibrate the teams compositions.
- a [pairing](examples/choose-your-character.json) config, where each user is to indicate characters he wants to play ; output is the pairing user/character allowed by constraints.
- a [output control demo](examples/output-customization.json) config, showing the capabilities of the model representation plugin system.
- a [malformed config](examples/bad-config.json), just for you to see how not write your own, or to see how the program behave in presence of such mistypes.


# Options

## Global options

#### location
The base URL path to add before all system paths.

By default, at root, i.e. `"/"`.

#### base encoding
The base ASP encoding that will be augmented with other atoms and shows described by the other options.

#### shows
List of atoms (or a string containing one atom and its arity) to `#show`, meaning those that will be shown in the output page.

#### engine
Future option that will allow to use other flavors of ASP, or other languages.
Currently, the only valid value is not set, or `ASP/clingo`.

#### compilation

Must be one of `direct access`, `specific access`.

With `direct access`, the compilation of the models is performed each time the `/results` page is loaded, before the loading.

With `specific access`, the compilation of the models is performed each time the `/compilation` page is loaded.

#### generated pages
A list of string being the pages to be generated.
Defaults to all pages, meaning: `["user", "overview", "compilation", "configuration"]`.

#### public pages
A list of string being the pages to be shown in the main page. If a page is shown but not generated, an error should be raised at website compilation.

Defaults to None, meaning equivalence with `generated page` option.

#### raise warnings
Defaults to *true*. If *false*, doesn't indicate possible discrepancies in the configuration file at website-compilation time.

#### raise errors
Defaults to *true*. If *false*, doesn't fail on malformed configuration file at website-compilation time.

#### template
The template name to use. Must be a directory in `templates/` dir, containing the template html files.


## Users options

#### type
Must be one of `restricted`, `valid-id` or `convertible`.

With restricted, `allowed users` field is expected to be a dict or list.

With `valid-id`, `allowed users` field is expected to be none or empty.

With `convertible`, `allowed users` field is expected to be a pure python function taking the user string as input, and returning its uid.


#### allowed
Must be a dict, linking human representation of user uid to its (unique) ASP representation,
or a list, when human and ASP representations are equivalent for all choices.

If the user type is not restricted, that option is to be left blank or non-provided.



## Choices options

#### default
By default, the user is generated with these combinations.

May be "all", none, empty list, or a list of choices (if choice type allows for many choices to be made).

If the given default choice is not compatible with the choice type (e.g. a list for a single choice), errors will be raised.

#### type

May be one of `single`, `multiple`, `at least 1`, `at least <N>` (with N an integer > 0), `at most <K>` (with `K` an integer > 1), or `<N> to <K>`.

Obviously, `1 to 1` is equivalent to `single`.
Finally, `0 or 1` is a valid, more explicit alias to `at most 1`.



#### choices
Must be a dict, linking human representation of choice to its (unique) ASP representation,
or a list, when human and ASP representations are equivalent for all choices.


#### produced atoms
These atoms are produced for each user, depending of made choices.

#### data atoms
Data atoms are other atoms produced from the input and choices, but, in opposition to produced atoms, they are all produced, at website compilation time, from all possible `{user}` and `{choice}` values.

They are useful to specify the user and choices entities only once, in the configuration, without having to write them explicitely in the base encoding.


## Output options

#### max models
Integer, zero or more, describing the maximal number of models the output page will show.
If set to zero, there is no limit to the number of models shown on output page.

See `model selection` option for controlling which models are shown.

#### model selection
This options only takes effect when the total number of models exceed the max limit set by `max models` option.

if this option is set to `first`, #`max models` models output by the solver are taken (with clingo, it's implemented by sending the `-n N` option).

if this option is set to `sampling`, #`max models` models are randomly drafted from the set of all models.

#### model repr
This option allows to finely control how each model is rendered on the output page.

The very basic value for it is `"standard"`. Now, there is other possibilities.

Appart for the special value `standard`, __this option must be a list, where each item is a dict__.
And each dict must provide a `kind` key, providing a string being the name of a valid model representation plugin.

See [ModelReprPlugin subclasses](plugins/model_repr/), the [configuration example](examples/output-customization.json)
trying to show all capabilities of that option and the following example of valid value for model repr:

    "output options": {
        "model header repr": [
            {
                "kind": "title",
                "index": true,
                "uid": true
            }
        ],
        "model footer repr": [
            {
                "kind": "raw",
                "shows": "all"
            },
            {
                "kind": "table/2",
                "rows": "user",
                "columns": ["blue", "red"],
                "source": "team/columns,rows",
                "caption": "Show in which team (blue or red) is each user."
            },
        ],
        "header repr": [
            {"text": "This is shown before the {len(models)} models list"},
            {
                "kind": "table/2",
                "rows": "user",
                "columns": "choice",
                "source": "choice/row,columns",
                "caption": "Each row indicates which users a particular user wanted to have in its team."
            }
        ],
        "footer repr": [
            {"text": "This is shown after the models list (which took {runtime_compilation_repr} to compile)"},
        ]
    }

    # (note that header and footer are also configurable using the same constructions)

This model representation is broken in three parts:
- a title, that will show the solution index and its uid
- a raw list of (all) atoms
- a binary table in two dimensions, where rows are users, 2 columns `blue` and `red`, and relationships between rows and columns are given by `team/2` atoms, with the first arg being the column, and the second the row. Hence, `team(1,2)` will indicate that user `2` is associated to `blue` (considering the second team is numbered 2).

The default representation, `standard`, looks like this :

    "output options": {
        "model header repr": [
            {"kind": "title", "index": True, "uid": True },
        ],
        "model footer repr": [
            {"kind": "raw", "shows": "all" },
            {"kind": "table/2", "rows": "user", "columns": "choice", "source": "assoc/rows,columns" },
        ],
        "header repr": [
            {"kind": "text", "text": "{nb_models} models found in {compilation_runtime_repr}."}
        ],
        "footer repr": [
            {"kind": "text", "text": "{('All solutions share '+str(len(common_atoms.atoms))+'atoms.') if common_atoms.atoms else 'There is no common atoms across solutions.'}"}
        ]
    }

You may introduce new plugins in their directory, and use them in your configuration file.



#### insatisfiability message
Defaults to "*that program is unsatisfiable*".


## Overview options
The overview page indicates all current selected data.

#### public
Default to *true*. If *false*, the overview page URL is not indicated in main page.

#### type
Type(s) of overview. Possible values are: `raw`, `table`.

Multiple may be given, as a list.

Default to `raw` and `table`.


## Configuration options
This json data is the configuration itself.

No option for the moment.


## Main page options

#### title
String that will be set as h1 title in the main page.

#### description
String going just under the title, and before all technical links.


# ROADMAP

### Basic features
- [x] configuration is loaded from file, and default values are added if necessary
- [x] add options in the config
    - [x] support of numbered choice types
    - [x] support it in the UI too: https://www.plus2net.com/javascript_tutorial/checkbox-limit.php
    - [x] support for sampling
- [x] don't recompile the models if nothing changed
- [x] website is running and all pages are accessible
- [x] show a working website, with working forms
- [x] working example use case
- [x] table representation of rel/2-types models
- [x] have `templates/` dir, where multiple templates can live. Allow each configuration file to specify the template to use
- [x] examples
    - [x] choose your character, a simple one-to-one pairing with binary preferences.

### doable in less than a day

- [ ] doc for newcomers
- [ ] doc for non technical users
- [x] in restricted user mode, allow to only provide user names. Uid can be decided internally. Same goes for choices.
- [x] when choices are presented, widget are in the state representing current choices (meaning, checkboxes are checked).
- [x] provide ASP base encoding in a file, as a filepath, instead of being inlined (thus unreadable) in the json.
- [x] choices must be described by a text set in configuration
- [x] allow for saving current sever state, so it can be stopped and restarted without data loss
- [x] provide to each model a unique, human-readable identifier that allows to reference it, even if model order is changed, or if models are removed or added after choices changes.  (done with hashname module, based on a sorted view of clyngor models)
- [x] each model has a copy2clipboard button, to easily share their result in the most sensible way.
- [x] allow users to get the list of new and lost models their preferences created.  (an history page, saying «USER changed its preferences, leading to N new models and L lost models»)
- [ ] implement other choices types
    - [ ] `ranking`, an order of proposition
    - [ ] `independant ranking`, to implement the majority judgment (many proposition may have the same rank)
- [ ] implement other model representations
    - [ ] majority judgment
- [x] plugin system for `asp models -> html repr`
- [ ] implement funny plugins
    - [ ] biseau
    - [ ] matplotlib
    - [ ] stats over all models
- [ ] examples
    - [x] make balanced teams, allowing each user to select other users he wants to be with.
    - [ ] make balanced teams, grouping users depending of their personal score, trying to get N teams of same score.   (laser tag example)
    - [ ] choose your character, a one-to-one pairing with ranked preferences.
    - [ ] choose your character among many, a maybe-to-one pairing with ranked preferences, and group optimization based on roles.
    - [ ] restaurant choice based on ranks  (majority judgment demo)
    - [ ] organize a tabletop game evening (game & dishes preferences)
- [x] Bakasp As A Service: enable one app to run many configurations, enable to create ones, etc.

### Needs a good amount of work
- [x] multiple choices scheme: users may have to prodive multiple informations for a single service to behave correctly. This needs a complete rethink of how to handle forms and output atoms.
    - [x] a first approach: choice become in json config a __list__ of choices, asked one by one to the user.

- [ ] support for python instead of ASP
    - [ ] function taking atoms (in json format?) as input, yielding atoms (in json format?) as output
    - [ ] function taking atoms (in json format?) as input, yielding html representation

- [ ] allow a model to be debuggable (automatically) with SPOCK method
- [ ] when unsatisfiable, propose *degraded* models where one (randomly chosen ?) constraint is ignored.

- [ ] plugin system for other parts of the soft ? forms maybe ?

- [ ] implement other model representations
    - [x] when multiple metrics are used, show the solutions in a pareto front (Without using asprin ; pareto front computation is made by hand, without minimizations and maximizations)

- [ ] examples
    - [ ] carpooling for lunch (multiple cars, multiple restaurants, each human has its preferences of restaurants, not all have a car, trying to minimize the number of used car -> may need an exploration of paretto front)
    - [ ] placement of peoples for dinner (needs complex forms)

- [ ] roover: an high-level DSL to define ASP search space.
